1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4.
X, Y, Z, X, Y, Z, X, Y, Z.
This is Monday, January 9, and sitting in the back wing of the Hal Booty Building, getting ready to interview Dr. Robert Berg, Distinguished Professor of Geology.
Now check your, say, one sentence.
Testing, one, two, three.
There you go.
Bob, for the sake of someone who might listen to this tape or review it many years from now, would you summarize your career experience
before you came to A&M?
Where'd you grow up, go to college, where had you worked and taught before coming to A&M?
I was born in St. Paul, Minnesota and began picking up fossils along the banks of the Mississippi at the age of nine.
This got me into geology of course.
In Minnesota they didn't know anything about geology but they knew about iron mining so everybody said I should
be a mining engineer.
So I enrolled in the university in 1942, I think it was, and enrolled in the mine school.
They gave us a little book.
This pamphlet was on the alumni summaries.
It was a very thin book at that time, and it was filled with references such as, graduated in mining engineering in 1925, went to work for the South Rhodesian Mining Company, deceased in Africa in 1927.
From that, I realized that there would always be job openings for mining engineers.
I changed my major, though, after working in an open pit mine and subsequently underground.
I changed it to geology, where a person could be out in the bright sunshine.
I got my Ph.D. in 1951, after three years in the Army.
I went to work for the California Company in the Rocky Mountain area.
That was a subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company of California.
And I worked for them for six years.
I worked for Independent out of Big Spring, Texas for almost two years.
And one day our bosses in Big Spring, Texas called us up in Denver and said we'd like to have you moved down to Big Spring.
And so we said we got a better idea.
So we took over their interests in the Rocky Mountain area on a half-time retainer and we became consultants.
which meant we did anything in the oil business for money.
I spent there for nine years as a consultant.
The business at that time, so I had a total of 16 years.
And the business at that time was pretty low, low rate of drilling and so on.
We managed to make a pretty good living, but during that time I got offers to apply
on faculties at various places, and none of them sounded too interesting.
I'd be coming in as an assistant professor.
And it wasn't until Earl Cook called me in 19...
66, late in 66, and wondered if I would be interested in a department head.
Of course, it was a great opportunity because there was a lot of money coming to A&M, reorganization, and I thought, well, if there's any place to start, start a teaching career being as a head, then I could go either direction.
How did you know Earl Cook?
Earl had hired a fellow from the USGS, US Geological Survey, by the name of Jim Case.
And Jim Case was a hard rock geologist plus a geophysicist, gravity and magnetics.
And he and I knew each other quite well in Denver.
And so I published a number of papers that had some new ideas.
for that time.
And so he's the one that actually recommended me to Earl Cook.
And we won't talk about dollars any other time.
What was the beginning salary?
Twenty thousand a year.
Twenty thousand a year to be the department head.
Yeah.
Did you come to visit before you accepted the position?
Yes, I came down and actually Earl called me about three times.
The first two times, I just turned, I was too busy, Earl.
I got too much to do here.
Finally, the third time, I'd been thinking about it for a couple months, and I said, well, I'll come down.
That was in October.
And so I came down, and I accepted the job then, and moved down in January of 67'.
Describe the department in its staffing and its facilities when you arrived.
Who was here and where were they?
Members of the faculty that were already here were Travis Parker, Fred Smith, Clay Seward,
Carl Koenig and Mel Schroeder.
Those people were good teachers.
They had never done any significant research.
Mel Schroeder, only one that did dabble in research.
And the department's reputation was negligible around the country.
However, during those years, the 50s in particular, Travis Parker and others turned out some really good students who went on to make a lot of money in the oil business.
The reputation of A&M in the oil business was tops because of these graduates, not because of the factory.
So if we could coin the phrase in applied geology, they were well known in petroleum.
Yes.
And those were students that by and large had gotten only an undergraduate degree here.
That's right.
All right.
Where was the department located physically on campus?
Before I got here, the department was in engineering.
It was called—and the degree was geological engineering.
When the College of Geosciences was formed, it was taken out of engineering and put in the College of Geosciences.
Therefore, we couldn't give the geological engineering degree.
We had to give a bachelor of science.
All right.
And physically, in what building were they?
in the front building there since 1930.
And what was it called then?
Department of Geology.
No, I mean it's the Hal Booty building today.
What was it then?
Engineering building?
No, it housed, when I came there, it housed chemical engineering.
Petroleum had already moved out.
And it was just called the geology building.
Oh.
If you notice in the front, it just says geology and petroleum engineering.
Okay.
The reorganization of geosciences occurred when?
The creation of geosciences.
Well, the 2000 committee is what it was called, I believe.
I think their report dates from about 1964, but it was another year or so before they hired Horace Byers, a noted meteorologist, a member of the National Academy of Science as dean, and Earl Cook as associate dean.
And Earl had the responsibilities for geology, geophysics, and geography hiring, whereas
And so when you arrived in 67, the College of Geosciences already was a reality, and the department was already administratively a part of that group.
I came here as head of the geology and geography department, and immediately was split off.
Geography, Ed Duran was the only surviving tackling member at that time.
Skip Schlesselman.
Schlesselman.
But he retired.
So Ed Duran took over the hiring in geography.
Did the department have the authority at that point to give graduate degrees, the geology department?
Yes.
Because one of the first...
when I came here with a PhD.
So the whole, I don't know when they were instituted.
Do you remember anything about the comparative number of majors, students majoring in geology at that time?
I can remember only the graduate students a bunch.
About how many?
11.
Two of them actually not in residence, inactive.
You must have come down for an interview visit.
Yes.
What was your impression of the campus and the community on that first visit?
That's hard to say.
I was impressed.
It was an academic atmosphere and a beautiful campus with the live oaks and so on.
Physically, that was pretty nice.
All the buildings, of course, were old.
That didn't impress me that way.
until I lived in the geology building several years.
My impression was that it had the potential, with enough money that had been put into it, it had the potential to be a great university.
Did you meet either vice president or the president then on that visit?
I met Andy Suttle.
What was your impression of Dr. Suttle?
This is the vice president for research we're talking about.
Did he attempt to interview you?
What was your first impression of him when you did meet him?
He didn't have any time to spend with me, actually.
I had made an appointment at his request to come and see him, and at the time I got there, sitting there waiting for him to give me an audience while he was rushing around, phone calls, papers, and so on, excited about something.
I never did get to really talk to him.
Okay, you come in and begin.
What were your personal goals for the department as you become the new department head?
Well, I inherited that, of course, from Earl Cook.
Earl Cook was going to build a good department that had good research and good teaching.
to double or triple a faculty almost immediately, or accomplish this without firing, I should say, any of the existing faculty.
And so I saw it as a real opportunity to be in on the building.
He asked me my salary, $20,000.
Yeah, you mentioned that.
It turned out that year of consulting, I netted, because I lived on $22,000.
So I actually took a 10% cut and cut me down.
But that wasn't important to me at the time, because neither was tenure or anything else that we didn't have.
My interest was getting in an academic environment.
I had worked for so many people preceding 16 years
It didn't bother me a bit.
I've been here a year.
If they didn't like it, I walked away.
But you thought at that time you were making a lifetime career change toward academia?
Yes.
Okay.
Describe how you led the department upward, forward.
Who were some of the first key appointments and so forth?
Well, first thing, let me say that what I did was I took over all the department business.
I know the academic environment required or used committee structure, but I decided that wasn't the way I was going to learn the department.
Fortunately, I had Mrs. Gladys Byers, who worked for the department for about thirteen years, and she knew what a form 500 was, and I had no idea what a form 500 was.
And of course, there are flurries of those forms going around every fall.
So, I depended on her to make out all the forms and submit them in a timely fashion.
Peter Groot was in oceanography at the time.
He was a great help.
He came over and showed me how I should view the academic budget.
He was very nice.
Describe this man, Groot, whom both you and I know well, but describe him.
He was an accountant type.
His business degree was from Europe.
And I think he'd been in the Dutch Air Force at one point.
I don't know.
No, I don't believe so.
Yeah.
You know, at the time, in Calhoun's office, when we had both been doing a lot of business and trying to help the research and trying to help .
According to the state purchasing, you had to get three bids and all that.
Well, a winch or something went out on the ship
when they were near the Panama Canal.
And of course, they couldn't get three bids and go through the state purchasing.
So Peter said, oh, let me take care of this.
And so he went over to the Research Foundation and got about $4,000 in traveler's checks, flew down there, bought the winches, installed them on the ship, and went out.
So he was doing things like that all the time to facilitate the research in New York.
As you begin to add to the faculty, who were the key additions at first?
Well, actually, six months before I got here, middle of 66, Earl Cook had already hired Tom Tia, who was a mineralogist, and David K. Davies, who was a young Welshman, very energetic.
So we started out with them.
and those junior faculty members, and they were, turned out to be very good.
And let's see, who else?
Well, Earl wanted instant recognition in research.
So he knew of the rock mechanics work with the geologic applications being done by Shell Lab.
And this was John Hand and his associates, Mel Friedman, John Logan, George Sowers, Dave Starnes.
At the same time, that research group was being broken up and shipped off into different places, and they didn't like that.
Because they had hired on Michelle to do the research, and not to do operations.
Immediately there was this opportunity then to hire the whole group, bring them up here, and have the instant recognition that A&M was the watch mechanic's place.
And it worked.
About when did that occur?
1967.
Oh.
And the whole bunch came at the same time I did.
He said, Earl Cook was doing that hiring, so I didn't do watching geology.
And you all were not, space wasn't a problem at that point.
No.
Where did this?
Yeah, it was a problem.
I think we had our first remodeling in the summer of 67.
Pardon me.
Where did the money for these new faculty, do you know where they found that money?
I forgot.
I know the first year, they got $500,000 for new machines.
That is rigged, tri-axial compression machines.
The reason they had to build their machines right away was that a former student by the name of Ron McAdams, you ever heard of him?
He was the Shell president.
He was Vice President of Exploration at the time.
He was President of Shell Development Laboratory.
And he had been mad at me.
He was a graduate of A&M in 1938.
He'd been mad at A&M ever since Gilchrist fired Charles Lawrence Baker as head of geology in 1938.
Well, did he let the, did he allow that machinery to move up here?
No.
Oh, he still didn't?
So that first 500,000
You know, I don't know, I can't remember.
Within a couple of years, of course, they had big news.
And I'm assuming that these salaries were competitive in terms of the market at that time or they wouldn't have come.
That's what, which was certainly in high cotton then.
Were there any, do you remember any snafus or now amusing events of those early months?
No, I read not at all.
Okay.
As far as you know, whose idea was it to upgrade, strengthen geology at that time?
Cook?
From Hell Booty.
Because he pushed for organizing the college.
Okay.
And bringing all the earth sciences together.
And, of course, our...
I think the impetus came from Cow Booty originally.
They hired a good man though, Forrest Byers, because he was well known and well respected.
And then he became vice president for academic affairs, and Cook became the dean of geosciences.
So that the...
so that there was continuity of support at the upper level for the geology department.
Now the lab space was also in what is now the Hal Booty building now named
It's still in the basement.
All right, so that you all had offices and research facilities in the same building.
Yeah, what happened, we had to move out chemical engineering.
I don't remember where they went, but none of the present big engineering buildings were there.
So chemical engineering went someplace.
They were only here a couple years.
Were there, in those early years of this growth and progress, were there some important breakthroughs in terms of research funding and or discoveries, publications by anybody in the department?
Well, of course, the Center for Tectonal Physics is the rock mechanics lab.
We were in business very shortly and had a backlog of experiments and so on.
They started writing them up, and the publication stream was maintained.
And John Handen was primarily the money raiser.
He got on national committees and recommended certain experiments to be done, and then he ran back here to do those experiments and so on.
So that very cozy relationship lasted quite a while and sustained.
But one thing happened.
People around the country were so impressed on the results of this rock mechanic that everybody started building on it.
And pretty soon, what A&M did, they couldn't keep up with individuals around the country who did many other things.
Maybe there were 20 of them after that.
So everything that was new and different about rocket mechanics at that time was immediately copied and took away from the reputation of A&M.
And you as the new department head, what kind of research were you doing in the late 60s, early 70s?
Or was there any time?
Yeah, there was plenty of time.
I turned out at least two-fifths of a year because that was the academic way of doing things.
In 1967, in the summer, I read that two friends of mine were developing a big field.
in southeastern Montana called the Bell Creek Field.
Hopefully they could use 120 million barrels of water.
So I called them up and said, you got any cores for the reservoir?
Oh yeah, we got cores.
This was a big, big field area and they had eight or ten cores.
So I said, why don't you send them down here and we'll start working on this.
I'd like to work on the reservoir now.
So that started.
I went and worked closely with David K. Davies.
Dye Davies, I don't remember his name.
And he was petrarchal.
And we published several papers on the Bell Creek Field, which I think impressed people in Rocky Mountain particularly.
That we did good work.
We did reasonable work.
During those years as you were dreaming of the department and its reputation growth was there any institution or number of institutions that you kind of were looking at as a model for A&M to compete with?
No.
Who were the other great geology programs in the country?
And very few academic people were doing any kind of oil business research.
And the reason was, in 1966, 67, hiring was at an all-time low, about the
Unfortunately, a lot of academic geologists then turned on the industry and said, no, we aren't going to have anything more to do with it.
They cut the ties that they've developed over the years.
And that was the wrong thing to do, because we started publishing and started getting money for research grants, not from the federal government, which a lot of research is supporting.
During that period, what would have been the normal breakdown of the funding for a typical faculty member?
What percentage from institutional money, research money, etc.
?
That's a tough question.
The reason is, you see, in those, at the beginning there, I had nothing to do with the research itself.
Technophysics handled their own research, of course, through the Research Foundation, which facilitated the spending of money.
And many of us, Davies and myself and Tom Thiel, we all acted as individual entrepreneurs.
But was the department getting about half of its funding in research?
Well, at least all summer salaries were paid.
Okay.
Outside of that, I don't know.
the total state budget i had to work with was pretty modest 300 000 or something like that of course these days that would be what three minutes but that didn't pay summer salaries we had a headcount faculty approaching maybe 30. but many of those people not for the whole time
Let's see.
Let's go to staff.
You mentioned the key lady a while ago.
Who were the key staff people that kept the department ticking?
Describe Mrs. Byers' duties.
to the department head, and so she did all the paperwork.
Describe the manner of her personality and style.
Can you share with this machine any anecdotes where she pulled some fat out of the fire or helped avoid some important mistake?
but I'm sure that there were things that if she hadn't done them, it would have been hell.